# Playing with Identity: Exploring the Motivates behind Gender Bending and Identity Representation in MMORPG Gaming
## Abstract
This article explores people's practices in the virtual spaces of online gaming. Through interviews with gamers, this essay considers how gamers construct and maintain identities within virtual social systems. Inparticular, the article discusses digital gender bending, which is defined as a difference between the gender reported by the player in the survey from the gender of the player’s main character in the game, and considers the potential that these games offer for their users to engage in alternate gender identities. To some extent, gender-switching behaviors disrupt the existing gender stereotypes and cultural order, providing gamers, especially female gamers, with the potential to evade or dismantle the constraints of the dominant gender order. However, this potential is still limited, and the existing gender order and stereotypes still dominate the cultural space of gaming and shape the gender cognition and response patterns of game players.

## Introduction
The anonymity and mobility of the online gaming space provides a degree of flexibility for the construction of players' gender identities. The gender-transforming behavior of presenting avatars with images of the opposite sex becomes an integral part of players' identity display strategies. Understanding the motives of this behavior and its consequences, especially assessing the relationship between this behavior and gender stereotypes in game culture, helps us to better understand the interaction structure and behavioral logic of game player groups from a gender perspective.  
  
Based on this consideration, this essay attempts to analyze the motives behind players' gender-bending behavior, especially the similarities and differences in the motives of players with different gender identities, which are neglected in the existing literature, through in-depth interviews based on a systematic critical discussion of the relevant literature, and then explore the relationship between the phenomenon of gender-switching as a strategy of gender identity expression and gender stereotypes and power in MMORPG game culture. The relationship between the phenomenon of gender-switching as a strategy for expressing gender identity and gender stereotypes and power in MMORPG culture is explored.

## Literacture Review and Topic
### Gender Stereotypes and Gender Relations in Gaming Culture
Online gaming has always been considered a male-dominated culture. However, with the boom in mobile gaming and the diversification of game genres, female and non-binary gamers are becoming a high percentage of gamers. Even in massively multiplayer online role-playing games (MMORPGs), which are considered hardcore games and require a high level of gaming skill, confrontation, and time investment, the participation of female and non-binary players is growing rapidly.  
  
However, the male-dominated gender stereotypes still prevalent in gaming culture have not changed. The "stereotype" that women and nonbinary people are not good at competitive games remains deeply entrenched, even though several previous studies have confirmed that there is no difference in the ability of men and women to learn games, play against each other, and reflect on their agility.  
  
A recent study suggests that such stereotypes are related to at least two factors: One is the way people define the culture of gaming and the characteristics of the players themselves. If videogames are seen as confrontational activities, and hardcore gamers are seen as players measured by game technology, player self-identity, etc., then men are necessarily dominant. Another aspect concerns established gender norms and identities. Due to the restrictions on female behavior and presentation imposed by real-world gender norms, male players tend to have more freedom of movement and visibility in the existing gaming culture. Additional barriers for female and non-binary players are created by the inherent anonymity of traditional gaming culture and the prevalence of violent and confrontational language in male-dominated games. The result is a further reduction in the invisibility of gender groups other than men in games.  
  
Of course, beyond these two factors, the fact that game culture is rooted in the real-world social gender order is the most fundamental reason for the disadvantaged position of female and non-binary gender players. Gaming culture, especially the more adversarial MMORPG genre's conformity to masculine identity and exclusion of players from other gender groups, is partly a result of the social gender identities and norms to which players are assigned. For example, a previous empirical study found that both boys and girls enjoy participating in video games until the fifth grade, but once their perceptions of gender roles are fully formed, boys become more game loving, while girls' interest in and participation in video games decreases significantly. This means that the participation, place, and stereotypes of both sexes in gaming culture are as much a product of the cultural constructions and power disciplines associated with gender identity in the socialization process as they are of gender ideas in general, the most critical of which is patriarchy, a cultural system that maintains and perpetuates male social control, with a binary relationship between the sexes and a presumed ideology of male superiority. According to this ideology, the expression of aggression, violence, and desire in relatively extreme forms is the domain of men. In contrast, female behavior is expected to be passive, complementary, and cooperative, and any transgression of established gender norms is considered heretical.  
  
This stereotype of male dominance and female marginalization in gaming culture has many consequences. On the one hand, there are a number of game titles that actively cater to this gender bias, thereby reproducing and reaffirming the established patriarchal social gender order. Even game genres that are not overtly gendered tend to unconsciously perpetuate the dominant gender ideology when designing characters. On the other hand, such stereotypes shape the social conventions and interaction styles in games. Related studies by Chinese scholars have also found that gender stereotypes often serve as a referential indicator for game players to identify female and non-binary players. These players tend to be "inherently" slow to respond, prone to making operational errors, and more likely to use supporting roles.  


### Gender Transgression, Gender Bending and Gender as Performance in MMORPG Games
Gendered identity is social constructed. Judith Butler, a leading contemporary cultural theorist, argues that gender identity is not a natural state but a performative phenomenon, the product of a subject's ongoing verbal and bodily practices in accordance with social norms.  
  
West and Zimmerman propose the term "doing gender" and argue that mainstream gender identity and order cannot be maintained without individuals repeatedly integrating themselves into the "proper" gender categories through deliberate or subconscious interactions that reinforce and reproduce the "essentiality" of gender. The "essentialness" of gender is reinforced and reproduced as individuals repeatedly integrate themselves into the "correct" gender categories through conscious or unconscious interactions. The specific conditions and contexts of interaction determine how people engage in gender performance.  
  
The de-physicalization and anonymity of communication in networked interactions greatly increases the likelihood of transgressions in virtual gender performances, despite the dominance of male bias in gaming culture. Transgressions are those behaviors that "break the rules" or "cross the lines," i.e., deviate from or transgress social norms.  
  
The relative freedom of cyberspace allows players greater flexibility in constructing how they choose to gender. In most cases, an anonymous player can construct his or her own gender identity during the game through the creation of an avatar. It has been found that when people choose their avatars, they tend to project their ideal self-image onto those avatars. Due to the disembodiment and anonymity of online virtual space, this avatar may or may not correspond to one's real gender identity, that is, the phenomenon of gender bending.  
  
There are two main types of existing research related to this phenomenon: 1. Benefit-based decision making. The motivation for gender-swapping behavior is interest-based, and entry into the game with an image of the opposite gender can have tangible benefits and advantages for the player. For example, Hussain and Griffiths found that some male players choose to use a female character in order to receive preferential treatment from other male players, and Martey et al. showed that in most cases the purpose of gender bending is not identity related, but rather a strategic choice to exploit the game skills that the image possesses. 2. Perceptual motives based on aesthetic or fantasy needs. The main reason why players switch genders is because they believe that the image of the game character of the opposite sex satisfies their aesthetic needs, and profit is not the main motive for this behavior. Other studies have found that the purpose of the player is to imagine a heterosexual experience by engaging in this behavior. Regardless of the type of motivation, the underlying purpose of gender-bending behavior is to increase one's "enjoyment" of the game.  
  
In terms of the effects or consequences of gender bending, some existing research has identified this behavior as having potentially positive effects. For example, an early study of gender-swapping behavior among Chinese male gamers concluded that gender-bending behavior allows players to reverse the male-centered binary gender system to some extent and to challenge established gender norms. It has also been found that gender-bending behavior increases female gamers' sense of self-fulfillment, which, in turn, indirectly increases their level of sustained engagement with the game. However, some empirical studies have also found that gender bending can be detrimental to building collaborative relationships in gaming activities.  
  
Despite the large number of studies conducted on the gender bending behavior of game players, the above review shows that there are at least two deficiencies in the existing research: First, most studies on gender switching are still based on the binary gender and focus mainly on the cases of male players choosing female characters, and there is a lack of research on the gender switching behavior of female players and players with non-binary gender identities. Only a few studies have found that the avoidance of sexual harassment is one of the motivations for some female gamers to participate in games with male characters, and there is a lack of research on the gender transition behavior of female gamers.  
  
Despite the large number of studies conducted on the gender bending behavior of game players, the above review shows that there are at least two deficiencies in the existing research: First, most studies on gender switching are still based on the binary gender and focus mainly on the cases of male players choosing female characters, and there is a lack of research on the gender switching behavior of female players and players with non-binary gender identities. Only a few studies have found that the avoidance of sexual harassment is one of the motivations for some female gamers to participate in games with male characters, and there is a lack of research on the gender transition behavior of female gamers.  

Despite the large number of studies conducted on the gender bending behavior of game players, the above review shows that there are at least two deficiencies in the existing research: First, most studies on gender switching are still based on the binary gender and focus mainly on the cases of male players choosing female characters, and there is a lack of research on the gender switching behavior of female players and players with non-binary gender identities. Only a few studies have found that the avoidance of sexual harassment is one of the motivations for some female gamers to participate in games with male characters, and there is a lack of research on the gender transition behavior of female gamers.  
  
Based on the above discussion, the following research questions are posed in this essay: 1. What are the main motivations of female and non-binary gender players in gender bending behavior? What are the similarities and differences with male players? 2. What are the consequences of switching between real gender identities and virtual heterosexual gender identities? How do established gender stereotypes and the binary gendered cultural order of gaming relate to the phenomenon of gender bending in games?
